IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026   8131  Joint Resource Management and Load Balancing in Multi-Satellite Beam Hopping With Interference Suppression: An Energy Minimization Perspective  Guanhua Wang   ,   Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Fang Yang   ,   Senior Member, IEEE , Jiaji Liu   ,   Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Jian Song   ,   Fellow, IEEE , and Zhu Han   ,   Fellow, IEEE  Abstract —Low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite communications have received significant attention due to the global coverage and low-latency characteristics. Due to the limited size, weight, and power of LEO satellites, meeting the demand of satellite- terrestrial communications with minimal energy consumption while suppressing interference to co-existing systems remains a significant challenge. In this paper, a LEO satellite architecture with beam hopping (BH) is proposed, where the dynamic resource management and real-time load balancing are jointly imple- mented. Specifically, an optimization problem for the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing with multi-satellite collaboration is formulated to achieve the long-term average energy minimization, while suppressing the interference to the co-existing system. Subsequently, by introducing the Lyapunov optimization method, the long-term energy minimization is trans- formed into a series of dynamic optimization problems for each time slot, thereby ensuring both the energy minimization and queue stability, where the block coordinate descent algorithm is employed to alternately address these issues. In particular, the BH pattern is determined by the multiplier penalty method combined with the majorization-minimization algorithm. Additionally, the resource management is addressed through the successive con- vex   approximation   technique,   while   real-time   load   balancing is achieved via quadratic programming. Overall, the proposed method, which can be effectively implemented within polynomial time, outperforms other benchmarks in simulations by achieving interference   suppression   in   co-existing   systems   and   reducing  Received 22 April 2025; revised 19 August 2025; accepted 17 Novem- ber 2025. Date of publication 3 December 2025; date of current version 22 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFA0716602; in part by NSF under Grant ECCS-2302469; and in part by the Toyota, Amazon and Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) Adopting Sus- tainable Partnerships for Innovative Research Ecosystem (ASPIRE) under Grant JPMJAP2326. An earlier version of this paper was presented in part at the 2025 IEEE Globecom Workshop [1]. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was M. Giordani.  (Corresponding author: Fang Yang.)  Guanhua   Wang,   Fang   Yang,   and   Jiaji   Liu   are   with   the   Depart- ment   of   Electronic   Engineering,   Beijing   National   Research   Center   for Information   Science   and   Technology,   and   the   State   Key   Laboratory   of Space Network and Communications, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: wanggh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; fangyang@tsinghua.edu.cn; liujj24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn). Jian   Song   is   with   Shenzhen   International   Graduate   School,   Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn). Zhu Han is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004 USA, and also with the Depart- ment of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 446-701, South Korea (e-mail: hanzhu22@gmail.com). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TWC.2025.3635684  the   energy   consumption,   while   satisfying   the   communication demands.  Index Terms —Satellite communications, beam hopping, multi- satellite collaboration, energy minimization, resource manage- ment,   real-time   load   balancing,   queue   stability,   interference suppression, Lyapunov optimization.  I. I NTRODUCTION  I N RECENT years, mega-constellations of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites, such as Starlink and Kuiper, have been widely deployed for communications [2], [3]. Compared to traditional satellite communications, the LEO satellite com- munication offers lower propagation delays and higher data rates [4], [5], making it a key technology for next-generation wireless communications [6]. However, LEO communication systems face significant challenges in resource management and energy optimization due to their high mobility, limited resources, and spectrum overlap with co-existing systems [7]. Consequently, enhancing the reliability and efficiency of LEO satellite communications while mitigating the interference has become a critical issue. To overcome this challenge, multi-beam satellites have been employed to enhance the efficiency and data rates by dividing coverage areas into multiple cells, each served by a dedi- cated beam [8], [9]. Additionally, resource management and precoding among beams notably improved the performance of satellite-terrestrial communications [10], [11]. However, due to size, weight, and power (SWaP) constraints, only a limited number of beams can be equipped on a LEO satellite, and its swift motion introduces time-varying characteristics [12]. Therefore, beam hopping (BH) is adopted, where beams serve different cells in a time-division manner. Moreover, it enhances the flexibility in satellite communications and accommodates both the time-varying characteristics and the non-uniform distribution of communication demands. Conse- quently, BH has been recognized as an effective solution for LEO satellites and it has been discussed in 3GPP TR 38.811 [13]. Meanwhile, there have been several studies on satellite BH. Specifically, full-digital beamforming was applied to satellite beams, and a random search method was employed to deter- mine the BH pattern in [14]. Besides, a BH pattern scheme that  1536-1276 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8132   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  considered both communication demands and adjacent-beam interference avoidance was presented in [15]. In addition, liter- ature [16] introduced a matching-theoretic approach to jointly optimize the BH pattern and resource allocation. However, these methods are based on pre-scheduling BH time plans, which are inadequate in time-varying environments [17]. As a result, the BH pattern scheduling based on user service weight gain (USWG) within each time slot was proposed in [18]. Meanwhile, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) was adopted in [19] to dynamically select BH patterns. Nevertheless, these works predominantly focused on single-satellite systems. In multi-satellite scenarios, the complexity of managing inter- satellite interference and the BH pattern increases rapidly. To address this, literature [20] utilized a terrestrial control center to pre-schedule multi-satellite BH time plans, while multi- agent DRL was applied for dynamic BH pattern selection in [21] and [22]. Moreover,   due   to   the   overlapping   spectrum,   the   co- frequency interference between LEO satellites and co-existing systems should be considered. To address this, the interfer- ence between LEO satellites and geosynchronous orbit (GSO) satellite ground stations was avoided by pre-matching LEO satellites with terrestrial cells [7], [23]. Additionally, spectrum allocation was further introduced to suppress interference in [24]. However, these techniques still depend on pre-scheduling to realize interference avoidance with co-existing systems, and therefore lack adaptability to time-varying characteristics. Besides, it has been verified that the dynamic resource man- agement based on real-time channel states and queue lengths can effectively improve the communication performance in time-varying scenarios [25]. Specifically, the optimal cross- layer scheduling policy with hard delay constraints in the high signal-to-noise ratio regime was analyzed in [26]. Moreover, an optimal joint delay and energy control strategy was derived with a constrained Markov decision process framework [25]. In massive access systems, the mean-field approximation was adopted to reduce the computational complexity [27]. How- ever, these approaches typically rely on the prior knowledge on channel state and introduce significant computational com- plexity. Consequently, the Lyapunov optimization has been demonstrated as an alternative method to achieve the near- optimal   performance   [28],   and   has   been   applied   in   pilot scheduling for massive machine-type communications [29], decentralized dynamic offloading in mobile edge computing [30], [31], and age-of-information optimization in downlink systems [32]. In satellite communications, dynamic resource management was investigated for a single multi-beam satellite [33]. Recently,   the   superiority   of   integrating   load   balancing with resource management has been investigated [34]. In multi-satellite communications, the non-uniform distribution of communication demand and varying interference levels to co-existing systems further highlight the necessity for load balancing [20], [23]. Existing approaches achieved load bal- ancing by fixed pre-matching of LEO satellites to terrestrial cells based on the communication demand and interference level of each cell [7], [21]. Moreover, advanced laser inter- satellite links (ISLs) enable high data rate and long-distance communications, enhancing the feasibility of multi-satellite collaboration, which has been applied by satellite-based feder- ated learning [35] and cooperative offloading [36]. Therefore, real-time load balancing by multi-satellite is not only feasible but also crucial for improving the communication perfor- mance. Although significant progress has been made by the above literature, there are still several shortcomings. Firstly, few of these studies addressed the issue of minimizing energy consumption while satisfying the communication demands, which   is   essential   for   LEO   satellites   with   limited   SWaP and time-varying characteristics. Secondly, dynamic resource management in the case of multi-satellite BH communications with interference has not yet been investigated. In addition, existing load balancing strategies rely on fixed satellite-to-cell pre-matching, which lacks adaptability to dynamic conditions, and the potential of laser ISLs is not fully exploited. To address these issues, we make the following contributions: 1) A   multi-satellite   BH   architecture   for   LEO   satellite communication is proposed to minimize the long-term energy consumption and mitigate the interference to co- existing systems. By the Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty method, the long-term energy minimization is trans- formed   into   a   series   of   optimization   problems   for each time slot with theoretical performance guarantees. Through joint resource management and load balancing in this multi-satellite BH architecture, both the energy minimization and queue stability are considered, meet- ing satellite communication demands and suppressing the interference to co-existing systems. 2) The BH pattern and resource management are opti- mized   to   enhance   the   communication   performance. Specifically, to address the discrete variables and the computational complexity, the BH pattern is determined by a combination of the multiplier penalty (MP) method and the majorization-minimization (MM) algorithm, i.e., the MPMM approach. Moreover, the successive convex approximation (SCA) technique is applied to handle the non-convex constraints in resource management. These optimizations not only yield a significant reduction in energy consumption but also suppress interference to co- existing systems through the joint optimization of power and frequency segments. 3) Real-time load balancing via multi-satellite collaboration is implemented. Through multi-satellite collaboration, data packets are transferred via laser ISLs to satellites with more available resources and lower interference levels to GSO ground stations, thereby reducing the long-term average energy consumption. Additionally, quadratic programming is applied to obtain the load balancing scheme, and the extra energy overhead of laser ISLs during load balancing is also considered. Simulation results further demonstrate that jointly opti- mizing the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing through the block coordinate descent (BCD) algorithm can effectively decrease the energy consump- tion and outperform other benchmarks.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8133  Fig. 1.   The architecture of multi-satellite BH communications for energy minimization considering interference suppression and queue stability.  The paper is structured as follows. The system model for multi-satellite BH communications is introduced in Section II, encompassing the satellite network architecture, link models for LEO satellites to terrestrial cells and to GSO ground stations, and the queue model. In Section III, the optimization problem for minimizing energy consumption is formulated and transformed into a series of problems within each time slot by the Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty method. Moreover, the BCD algorithm is adopted in Section IV to alternately optimize the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing. Besides, simulation results are illustrated and analyzed in Section V, followed by the conclusion in Section VI. II. S YSTEM   M ODEL  The architecture of the LEO satellite network is introduced in Section II-A. Moreover, the link and queue models are also established in Section II-B and Section II-C, respectively. For ease of reference, the primary notations and their definitions are summarized in Table I, and the index   [ n ]   indicates that the variable is associated with the   n -th time slot.  A. Satellite Network  As shown in Fig. 1, the downlink system from multiple LEO satellites to terrestrial cells is investigated in this paper. Moreover, to enhance the resource management flexibility and mitigate the co-frequency interference, the available spectrum resources in LEO satellite communications are divided into multiple frequency segments, each with a bandwidth of   W   , and the set of the frequency segment indices is denoted as   L . For convenience, the indices of all LEO satellites and all cells form the sets   S   and   K , respectively. Moreover,   |S|   represents the number of elements in set   S , corresponding to the number of the LEO satellites, and similarly the numbers of cells and frequency segments are denoted by   |K|   and   |L| . Additionally, each LEO satellite has   N b   beams to serve its coverage area, with the cells covered by LEO satellite  s   forming   set   Ω( s ) .   Correspondingly,   each   cell   may   fall within the coverage of multiple LEO satellites, and the set of LEO satellites that can serve the   k -th cell is denoted as  Φ( k ) . Meanwhile, ground stations associated with the GSO satellites also exist in some cells, which form the subset  K G   ⊂ K . Besides, the spectrum of the GSO ground stations may overlap with LEO satellite communications. Specifically, for the ground station in the   k -th cell where   k   ∈ K G , the set of overlapping frequency segments between LEO and GSO satellites is denoted as   L k . Generally,   an   efficient   scheduling   policy   for   beams, resources, and loads is essential in satellite-terrestrial commu- nications due to the limited number of beams, non-uniform temporal   and   geographical   distribution   of   communication demands,   and   the   interference   suppression   for   co-existing systems. Therefore, beams are scheduled in a time-division manner to illuminate different cells across time slots, referred to as BH, while the duration of each time slot is   T 0 , and its index set is denoted as   N   . Besides, the dynamic resource management is executed among time slots, beams, and fre- quency segments to reduce the co-frequency interference and suppress interference to GSO ground stations. In addition, laser ISLs enable both inter-satellite data transmission and information exchange, facilitating load balancing and multi- satellite collaboration. Consequently, through multi-satellite collaboration, the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing are determined in each time slot to suppress inter- ference to co-existing systems and ensure the stability of all data queues, thereby adapting to non-uniform communication demands [28].  B. Link Model  In the   n -th time slot, the binary variable   f s,k [ n ]   is intro- duced   to   indicate   whether   the   beam   of   LEO   satellite   s  illuminates the   k -th cell. If   f s,k [ n ]   =   1 , the   k -th cell is illuminated by LEO satellite   s   during the   n -th time slot, other- wise, it is not illuminated. These variables form the coverage for cells   f s [ n ]   ∈ { 0 ,   1 } |K|× 1   by LEO satellite   s   during the  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8134   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  TABLE I L IST OF   P RIMARY   N OTATIONS  n -th time slot, known as the BH pattern of LEO satellite  s , and thereby the BH pattern matrix   F [ n ]   ∈ { 0 ,   1 } |K|×|S|  for all LEO satellites can be obtained. Similarly, the power allocation during the   n -th time slot of LEO satellite   s   in the  l -th frequency segment of the beam illuminating the   k -th cell is denoted as   p s,k,l [ n ] , subsequently constituting the resource management tensor   P [ n ]   ∈   R |L|×|K|×|S|   for all satellites across cells and frequency segments in the   n -th time slot. In LEO satellite downlink communications, the transmitting antenna gain of the LEO satellite is highly directional to ensure the service quality to the targeted cell and reduce the interference to other cells [13]. Conversely, for the receiver in   the   cell,   because   it   can   receive   signals   from   multiple LEO satellites simultaneously, the receiving antenna gain is identical for all LEO satellites that can serve this cell [20]. Moreover, the interference from satellites whose coverage does not contain this cell is negligible due to the low receiver elevation angle and long propagation distance. Specifically, the channel coefficient between the receiver in the   k -th cell and the beam illuminating the   j -th cell from LEO satellite  s   is denoted as   h s,k,j   [ n ] . Although the Doppler shift can be compensated with the satellite orbital information, other factors such as free-space path loss, antenna gains, multipath propagation, obstructions, and atmospheric attenuation still influence the channel coefficients   h s,k,j   [ n ]   [12], [15], [16], [37], [38], [39]. However, the proposed method does not rely on the specific form of the channel, as demonstrated in the subsequent analysis. Therefore, during the   n -th time slot, the  l -th frequency segment of the beam illuminating the   k -th cell in LEO satellite   s   encounters the interference not only from other beams of the same satellite but also from other satellites in   Φ( k ) , which is calculated as  I s,k,l [ n ] =   ∑  j ∈K\{ k }  | h s,k,j   [ n ] | 2 p s,j,l [ n ] f s,j   [ n ] +   ∑  r ∈ Φ( k ) \{ s }  ∑  j ∈K  | h r,k,j   [ n ] | 2 p r,j,l [ n ] f r,j   [ n ] ,   (1) where the first and second terms represent the intra- and inter-satellite interference, respectively. Therefore, the signal- to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) for the   l -th frequency segment of the beam illuminating the   k -th cell in LEO satellite  s   is expressed as  γ s,k,l [ n ] =   | h s,k,k [ n ] | 2 p s,k,l [ n ] f s,k [ n ]  N 0 W   +   I s,k,l [ n ]   ,   (2) where   N 0   is the noise spectral power density. Subsequently, the achievable data rate for the beam in LEO satellite   s  illuminating the   k -th cell can be obtained by aggregating the data rate on each frequency segment as  R s,k [ n ] =   f s,k [ n ]   ∑  l ∈L  W   log 2 (1 +   γ s,k,l [ n ]) .   (3) For the GSO ground station in the   k -th cell, the channel coefficient from the beam in LEO satellite   s   serving the   j -th cell is denoted as   g s,k,j   [ n ]   during the   n -th time slot. Moreover,  g s,k,j   [ n ]   varies significantly for different satellites due to the highly concentrated gain of the receiving antenna at the GSO ground station. Therefore, the interference in the   l -th frequency segment encountered by this GSO station from LEO satellite communications is given by  Z k,l [ n ] =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  j ∈K  | g s,k,j   [ n ] | 2 p s,j,l [ n ] f s,j   [ n ] .   (4) Moreover, the channel coefficients   h s,k,j   [ n ]   and   g s,k,j   [ n ]   are assumed to remain constant during the   n -th time slot. Con- sidering the motion of LEO satellites, these coefficients are updated among various time slots. Additionally, the laser ISL between LEO satellites is estab- lished between two space-borne laser terminals. Due to the abundant bandwidth and concentrated energy of laser ISLs, the data rate is primarily limited by the receiver sensitivity, tracking mechanism, and signal processing capabilities of the space-borne laser terminals, rather than by bandwidth or power [40]. In addition, the variation of inter-satellite distance is insignificant over a short time. Therefore, constant power and data rate are assumed to transfer data packets between satellites. Meanwhile, since the transmitter and receiver share the same optical path in space-borne laser terminals [40], the laser ISL results in symmetric power consumption at  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8135  both ends, where the power consumption of one laser ISL terminal is denoted as   P I , and the achievable data rate of its bidirectional transmission is represented by   R I .  C. Queue Model  In each time slot, data packets with fixed volume   M 0   arrive at LEO satellites for transmission to the cells. Specifically, the number of arriving packets destined for the   k -th cell on LEO satellite   s   during the   n -th time slot is denoted as   a s,k [ n ] , with an upper bound of   a max . Subsequently, these packets queue on LEO satellite   s   for transmission to the targeted cell. At the beginning of the   n -th time slot, the queue length for packets intended for the   k -th cell on LEO satellite   s   is indicated by  q s,k [ n ] . Besides, the set of all queue lengths in the   n -th time slot is denoted as   Q [ n ] . Additionally, achieving load balancing among LEO satel- lites   via   laser   ISLs   is   crucial   due   to   the   non-uniform geographical distribution of communication demands and the varying interference levels imposed by different LEO satellites on GSO ground stations within a given cell. The number of data packets transferred from LEO satellite   r   to LEO satellite   s   during the   n -th time slot destined for the   k -th cell is denoted as   b r,s,k [ n ] . If   b r,s,k [ n ]   >   0 , it indicates that packets are transferred from LEO satellite   r   to LEO satellite  s , otherwise, the transfer is reversed. Then, the load balancing tensor   B [ n ]   ∈   R |S|×|S|×|K|   among   all   LEO   satellites   is constructed. Therefore, with the determined load balancing scheme   B [ n ] , the amount of bidirectionally transferred packets through the laser ISL between LEO satellite   r   and LEO satellite   s   for load balancing during the   n -th time slot is given by  c r,s [ n ] =   ∑  k ∈K  | b r,s,k [ n ] | .   (5) Besides, since the laser ISLs also undertake other tasks, the number of packets transferred for load balancing on each laser ISL is limited by an upper bound of   c max . Moreover, the overall change in queue length   q s,k [ n ]   for load balancing can be determined with   B [ n ]   by  d s,k [ n ] =   ∑  r ∈ Φ( k )  b r,s,k [ n ] ,   (6) where   d s,k [ n ]   >   0   represents the queue length increases after load balancing, whereas   d s,k [ n ]   <   0   denotes a decrease. For the downlink transmission of LEO satellite, the number of transmitted packets is constrained by both the achievable data rate and the current queue length. Therefore, the number of transmitted packets from LEO satellite   s   to the   k -th cell during the   n -th time slot can be expressed as  x s,k [ n ] = min   { R s,k [ n ] T 0 /M 0 , q s,k [ n ] +   d s,k [ n ] }   ,   (7) which depends on the smaller one between the number of data packets that can be transmitted with the achievable data rate  R s,k [ n ]   and the number of data packets waiting in the queue after load balancing. Therefore, proper resource management  P [ n ]   and load balancing   B [ n ]   are crucial for the satellite network. Additionally, since the decisions for the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing are determined at the beginning of the   n -th time slot, the stochastic number of arriving packets   a s,k [ n ]   is uncertain at this moment and therefore not included in (7), whereas the impact of load balancing is considered. Consequently, the update of the queue length at the end of the   n -th time slot is given by  q s,k [ n   + 1] =   q s,k [ n ] +   d s,k [ n ] +   a s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ] ,   (8) which includes the arriving packets, transferred packets in load balancing, and transmitted packets for satellite-terrestrial communications. III. P ROBLEM   F ORMULATION AND   T RANSFORMATION  In Section III-A, the optimization objective of long-term average energy consumption is defined, while the overall opti- mization problem with BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing is formulated. Subsequently, in Section III-B, the long-term problem is transformed into optimization within each time slot by the Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty method.  A. Optimization Problem Formulation  Energy consumption is a crucial metric in LEO satellite communications, where the energy consumption   E s [ n ]   of LEO satellite   s   comprises two components: the energy consumed by direct transmission to cells   E T ,s [ n ] , and the energy expended via   laser   ISLs   during   load   balancing   E B ,s [ n ] .   Therefore,  E s [ n ] =   E T ,s [ n ] +   E B ,s [ n ] , and the former can be directly obtained as  E T ,s [ n ] =   ∑  k ∈K  ∑  l ∈L  p s,k,l [ n ] T 0 .   (9) Moreover,   the   transfer   time   required   for   load   balancing through the laser ISL between LEO satellite   r   and LEO satellite   s   can be calculated as  t r,s [ n ] =   M 0 c r,s [ n ]  R I  .   (10) Therefore, the energy consumption for load balancing in LEO satellite   s   via laser ISLs is given by  E B ,s [ n ] =   ∑  r ∈S  P I t r,s [ n ] .   (11) Notably, the space-borne terminals are present at both ends of the laser ISL, the energy consumption of laser ISL should be calculated twice in satellites at both ends. Due to the swift motion of LEO satellites and the time- varying communication demands, the expectation operator  E {·}   is introduced, while the long-term average energy con- sumption is the main focus as  E   =   lim  |N |→∞  1  |N |   E  {  ∑  n ∈N  ∑  s ∈S  E s [ n ]  }  .   (12) The optimization objective of this research is to minimize the long-term average energy consumption   E   of the LEO  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8136   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  satellite network by optimizing the BH pattern   F [ n ] , resource management   P [ n ] , and load balancing   B [ n ]   in each time slot. Moreover, it should be ensured that the service capacity of the LEO satellite network reliably meets the communication demands of terrestrial cells. Meanwhile, the interference to co- existing GSO ground stations is also suppressed. Therefore, the overall optimization problem is formulated as  ( P0 ) :   min  F [ n ] , P [ n ] , B [ n ] ,n ∈N   E   (13) s.t.   lim  |N |→∞  1  |N |   E   {| q s,k [ n ] |}   = 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k   ∈ K ,  (13a)  f s,k [ n ](1   −   f s,k [ n ]) = 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀ k   ∈ K ,   (13b)  f s,k [ n ] = 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k / ∈   Ω( s ) ,   (13c)  ∑  k ∈K  f s,k [ n ]   ≤   N b ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   (13d)  p s,k,l [ n ]   ≥   0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k   ∈ K ,   ∀   l   ∈ L ,   (13e)  ∑  k ∈K  ∑  l ∈L  p s,k,l [ n ]   ≤   P max ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   (13f)  ∑  l ∈L k  Z k,l [ n ]   ≤   Z max ,   ∀   k   ∈ K G ,   (13g)  b r,s,k [ n ] +   b s,r,k [ n ] = 0 ,   ∀   r, s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k   ∈ K ,  (13h)  b r,s,k [ n ] = 0 ,   ∀   r   ∈ S ,   ∀   s / ∈   Φ( k ) ,   (13i)  c r,s [ n ]   ≤   c max ,   ∀   r, s   ∈ S ,   (13j)  x s,k [ n ] M 0   ≤   R s,k [ n ] T 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k   ∈ K ,   (13k)  x s,k [ n ]   ≤   q s,k [ n ]+ d s,k [ n ] ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀   k   ∈ K ,  (13l) where the above constraints can be categorized as  •   Queue stability constraint : Constraint (13a) indicates that all queues should meet the mean rate stability condi- tion, whose satisfaction ensures that the average arriving rate of communication demand does not exceed the aver- age service rate as pointed in [28], thereby guaranteeing that the communication demands for each cell can be reliably satisfied by the LEO satellite network.  •   BH   pattern   constraints :   The   BH   pattern   indicator variables are binary as specified by constraint (13b). Moreover, constraints (13c) and (13d) stipulate that each LEO satellite can only serve cells within its coverage area and the number of served cells is limited by the number of equipped beams, respectively.  •   Resource   management   constraints : Constraint (13e) requires   the   transmission   power   to   be   non-negative. Besides, constraint (13f) sets the upper bound of the downlink transmission power for each satellite to   P max , which is sufficient for ensuring the queue stability.  •   Interference suppression constraint : To suppress the interference to the co-existing system, the sum of inter- ference to the GSO ground station on all frequency segments is suppressed not to exceed   Z max , as indicated in constraint (13g).  •   Load balancing constraints : Constraint (13h) mandates that the amount of incoming and outgoing packets for satellites at both ends of the laser ISL should be equal. Moreover, constraint (13i) dictates that packets destined for the   k -th cell can only be transferred among satellites within   Φ( k ) . Besides, the number of transferred packets per laser ISL during load balancing is limited by con- straint (13j).  •   Transmission constraints : Constraints (13k) and (13l) ensure the compliance with the condition in (7) regarding the number of transmitted packets.  B. Problem Transformation by Lyapunov Optimization  The problem (P0) aims to minimize the long-term average energy consumption while ensuring the mean rate stability of the queues on LEO satellites, i.e., preventing the contin- uous growth of queue length. However, solving this problem directly is challenging. Specifically, the objective function and constraint (13a) indicate a focus on long-term effects, while solving from a long-term perspective poses computational complexity challenges and requires substantial information. Therefore, a dynamic algorithm is necessary to balance the queue length and energy consumption, based on the queue length and channel coefficients in the current time slot. In particular, the Lyapunov function is introduced to characterize the queue length as  L q [ n ] =  1 2  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  q 2  s,k [ n ] .   (14) Moreover, to reflect the impact of the optimization on the queue length in each time slot with the given queue lengths  Q [ n ] , the Lyapunov drift is defined as  ∆ L q [ n ] =   E { L q [ n   + 1]   −   L q [ n ] | Q [ n ] } .   (15) Additionally, for the queue stability, the Lyapunov drift should be as small as possible in each time slot. Besides, for the objective function in problem (P0), the energy consumption in each time slot is incorporated as a penalty term into the Lyapunov drift, thereby forming the transformed Lyapunov optimization problem for each time slot as  ( P0-1 ) :   min  F [ n ] , P [ n ] , B [ n ]  ∆ L q [ n ]  L 0  +   V E 0  E  { ∑  s ∈S  E s [ n ]  ∣ ∣ ∣ Q [ n ]  }  (16) s.t.   (13b)   −   (13l) ,  where   V   is an adjustable coefficient to balance the queue length and energy consumption. To aggregate the terms in different   units,   the   normalization   factors   L 0   and   E 0   are applied. However,   solving   problem   (P0-1)   remains   a   challenge. Therefore, minimizing the upper bound of the objective func- tion is considered as an alternative solution [28]. Firstly, the boundedness of   a s,k [ n ] ,   x s,k [ n ] , and   d s,k [ n ]   in each time slot is established as  0   ≤   a s,k [ n ]   ≤   a max ,   (17a)  0   ≤   x s,k [ n ]   ≤   x max ,   (17b)  − d max   ≤   d s,k [ n ]   ≤   d max ,   (17c)  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8137  where (17a) holds due to the maximum number of arriving packets. Moreover, because of the constraints (13f) and (13j), the number of transmitted packets   x s,k [ n ]   and the absolute value of the change in each queue   | d s,k [ n ] |   are also bounded, whose upper bounds are denoted as   x max   and   d max , respec- tively. Based on the boundedness of these variables, the upper bound of the Lyapunov drift can be derived as  ∆ L q [ n ] =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  E  {   1 2   a 2  s,k [ n ] +  1 2   x 2  s,k [ n ] +  1 2   d 2  s,k [ n ] +   a s,k [ n ]( d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ])   −   d s,k [ n ] x s,k [ n ] + q s,k [ n ]( a s,k [ n ]+ d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ]) ∣ ∣ Q [ n ]  }  (18)  ≤   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  E  {   1 2   a 2 max   +  1 2   x 2 max   +  1 2   d 2  s,k [ n ] +   a max d max   +   d max x max   +   q s,k [ n ] a s,k [ n ] +   q s,k [ n ]( d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ]) ∣ ∣ Q [ n ]  }  (18a)  =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (   1 2   a 2 max   +  1 2   x 2 max  + ( a max   +   x max ) d max   +   q s,k [ n ] E { a s,k [ n ] }   +   E  {  q s,k [ n ]( d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ]) +  1 2   d 2  s,k [ n ] ∣ ∣ Q [ n ]  } )  (18b)  =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (  E  {  q s,k [ n ]( d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ]) +  1 2   d 2  s,k [ n ] ∣ ∣ Q [ n ]  }  +   q s,k [ n ] E { a s,k [ n ] }  )  + Υ 1 ,  (18c) where (18a) is derived by scaling the cross terms that are independent of   Q [ n ]   and the quadratic terms to their upper bounds, while   d 2  s,k [ n ]   is retained as a regularization term. Moreover, because the distribution of   a s,k [ n ]   is independent of other variables, its expectation is separated in (18b). Besides, the upper bound (18c) is obtained after rearranging all terms, while   Υ 1   represents the constant term. Therefore, by eliminating the constant term   Υ 1   and the term  q s,k [ n ] E { a s,k [ n ] }   unrelated to the optimization variables from (18c), while discarding the conditional expectation based on the concept of opportunistic optimization, a modified objective with the given coefficient   V   can be derived as  Λ( F [ n ] ,   P [ n ] ,   B [ n ];   V   ) =   ∑  s ∈S  (   1  L 0  ∑  k ∈K  ( q s,k [ n ]( d s,k [ n ]  − x s,k [ n ])+  1 2   d 2  s,k [ n ] ) +   V E 0  E s [ n ]  )  ,  (19) where the first term assigns greater weight to queues with longer lengths   q s,k [ n ]   in the objective, making them more likely to decrease   d s,k [ n ]   by transferring data packets to other satellites through load balancing, and to increase the number of transmitted data packets   x s,k [ n ] , while   d 2  s,k [ n ] / 2   serves as a regularization term. Meanwhile, the second term prioritizes minimizing the energy consumption   E s [ n ] . Consequently, the problem   (P0-1)   is   further   transformed   into   the   following optimization problem as  ( P0-2 ) :   min  F [ n ] , P [ n ] , B [ n ]   Λ( F [ n ] ,   P [ n ] ,   B [ n ];   V   )   (20) s.t.   (13b)   −   (13l) .  In addition, it is assumed that the channel coefficients   h s,k,j   [ n ]  and   g s,k,j   [ n ] ,   along   with   the   number   of   arriving   packets  a s,k [ n ] , follow a stationary distribution. Since the maximum transmission power in (13f) is sufficient, an optimal policy can be designed solely based on the current channel coefficients to achieve the minimum energy consumption   E opt   while satisfy- ing the constraints in (P0), as analyzed in [28]. Meanwhile, the performance gap between the results obtained by the Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty method and the possible optimal solution is ensured by the following proposition.  Proposition 1:   If the channel coefficients can be modeled as   Markov   processes,   given   the   coefficient   V   >   0 ,   the performance gap between the   E   obtained by solving problem (P0-2) and the optimal   E opt   is given by  E ≤ E opt   +   O (1 /V   ) .   (21) If the Slater condition is satisfied, meaning that the average service rate of the satellite network is strictly greater than the average packet arrival rate while still meeting all constraints, then the average queue length is bounded as  lim  |N |→∞  1  |N |   E  {  ∑  n ∈N  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  q s,k [ n ]  }  ≤ O ( V   ) .   (22)  Proof:   See Appendix A. According to Little’s Law, the average queue length is proportional to the average queueing latency in steady state. Therefore,   Proposition   1 characterizes the fundamental trade- off between energy consumption and queueing latency. As the control parameter   V   increases, the energy consumption of the satellite network approaches its optimal value; however, this comes at the cost of a larger average queue length, which corresponds to a longer queueing latency. Although the original long-term optimization problem is transformed into optimization in each time slot with guar- anteed   performance,   solving   the   problem   (P0-2)   remains challenging. Specifically, the BH pattern, resource manage- ment, and load balancing are mutually coupled, while the joint optimization of   F [ n ] ,   P [ n ] , and   B [ n ]   introduces significant computational complexity. To address this issue, the BCD algorithm is adopted, where each set of variables is optimized sequentially while keeping the others fixed. IV. P ROBLEM   S OLUTION FOR   E NERGY   M INIMIZATION  The optimization of problem (P0-2) is discussed in this section, and since the scope of discussion is confined to each time slot, the index   [ n ]   of variables is omitted for simplicity. The BH pattern   F , resource management   P , and load balancing  B   are optimized alternately with BCD algorithm in   Algorithm  1. Specifically, the BH pattern is determined by the MPMM approach in Section IV-A, which integrates the MP method for  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8138   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  Algorithm 1   BCD Algorithm for   F ,   P , and   B  Require:   Channel coefficients   h s,k,j   and   g s,k,j   , queue length   Q .  Ensure:   Optimized BH pattern   F opt , resource manage- ment   P opt , and load balancing   B opt .  1:   Init:   Initial value   F { 0 } ,   P { 0 } ,   B { 0 } ,   i   ←   0  2:   repeat  3:   Given fixed   P { i }   and   B { i } , minimize (19) by optimiz- ing   F   with the MPMM approach, and acquire   F { i +1 } .  4:   Given fixed   F { i +1 }   and   B { i } , minimize (19) by opti- mizing   P   with the SCA method, and obtain   P { i +1 } .  5:   Given fixed   F { i +1 }   and   P { i +1 } , minimize (19) with   B  by quadratic programming, thereby achieving   B { i +1 } .  6:   i   ←   i   + 1  7:   until   Λ( F { i } ,   P { i } ,   B { i } ;   V   )   is convergence  8:   F opt   ←   F { i } ,   P opt   ←   P { i } ,   B opt   ←   B { i } . the binary constraint and the MM algorithm for complicated objectives and constraints. Moreover, the resource manage- ment for joint optimization of power and frequency segment is tackled with SCA in Section IV-B, while load balancing is achieved by quadratic programming in Section IV-C. Finally, the computational complexity is analyzed in Section IV-D.  A. MPMM for BH Pattern  Given fixed resource management   P ∗   and load balancing  B ∗ , the optimization for the BH pattern   F   is formulated as  ( P1 ) : min  F   Λ( F ,   P ∗ ,   B ∗ ;   V   )   (23) s.t.   (13b) ,   (13c) ,   (13d) ,   (13g) ,   (13k) ,   and (13l) .  Due to the presence of constraint (13b), problem (P1) con- stitutes a mixed-integer nonlinear programming problem, for which obtaining the global optimal solution in polynomial time is difficult. To achieve an efficient solution, the constraint (13b) is incorporated into the objective function as an MP term to obtain the approximate solution by a series of rounds [41], and the introduced MP term in the   θ -th round is expressed as  J ( θ ) ( F ) =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  α ( θ )  s,k f s,k (1   −   f s,k ) +   β ( θ )   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  f   2  s,k (1   −   f s,k ) 2 ,   (24) where the first term corresponds to the Lagrange multiplier, and the second term represents the penalty function. These terms are combined to enhance the numerical stability of the algorithm, while the positive coefficients   α ( θ )  s,k   and   β ( θ )  s,k   update in each round. Moreover, binary constraint (13b) is further relaxed as  0   ≤   f s,k   ≤   1 ,   ∀ s   ∈ S ,   ∀ k   ∈ K .   (25) Consequently, in the   θ -th round, the problem is formulated as  ( P1- θ ) : min  F [ n ]   Λ( F ,   P ∗ ,   B ∗ ;   V   ) +   J ( θ ) ( F )   (26) s.t.   (13c) ,   (13d) ,   (13g) ,   (13k) ,   (13l) ,   and (25) .  Additionally, the update rules in each round for   α ( θ )  s,k   and   β ( θ )  s,k  are given by  α ( θ +1)  s,k   =   α ( θ )  s,k   + 2 β ( θ ) f   ( θ )  s,k   (1   −   f   ( θ )  s,k   ) ,   (27a)  β ( θ +1)   =   ρβ ( θ ) ,   (27b) where   f   ( θ )  s,k   is the solution of problem (P1- θ ) in the   θ -th round while forming   F ( θ ) , and   ρ   ≥   1   is adopted to gradu- ally strengthen the penalty coefficient so that the algorithm converges to a feasible solution. However, solving (P1- θ ) remains complicated since the MP term   J ( θ ) ( F )   is high-order and non-convex. Moreover, for the achievable data rate   R s,k   in constraint (13k), the second partial derivative with respect to   f s,k   can be calculated as  ∂ 2 R s,k  ∂f   2  s,k  =   ∑  l ∈L  W   | h s,k,k | 2 p s,k,l (2 +   γ s,k,l ) ln 2( N 0 W   +   I s,k,l )(1 +   γ s,k,l ) 2   ≥   0 ,   (28) which reveals that   R s,k   is non-concave with respect to   F . Consequently, constraint (13k) is also non-convex. To address this issue, the MM algorithm is introduced to iteratively solve problem (P1- θ ). In each iteration, given the current initial point ̂   F , a surrogate function tangent to the original function at this point is selected, allowing the problem to be solved in a more concise form [42]. It can be verified that the result obtained through this approach eventually converges to the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) solution of problem (P1-  θ ). Specifically, given the initial point ̂   F , a surrogate function for the MP term   J ( θ ) ( F )   can be constructed as  J ( θ ) ( F ; ̂   F ) =   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  α ( θ )  s,k  (  (1   −   2 ̂ f s,k ) f s,k   + ̂   f   2  s,k  )  +   β ( θ )   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (  (1   −   2 ̂   f s,k ) f s,k   + ̂   f   2  s,k  ) 2  ,  (29) which is a convex upper bound of   J ( θ ) ( F )   while remaining tangent to   J ( θ ) ( F )   at the point ̂   F . For the surrogate function of the achievable data rate   R s,k , the following auxiliary variables dependent on   F   are introduced for simplicity as  φ F  s,k,l ( F ) =   γ s,k,l ( F ) 1 +   γ s,k,l ( F )   ,   (30a)  ζ F  s,k,l ( F ) = log 2   (1 +   γ s,k,l ( F ))   −  φ F  s,k,l ( F ) log 2   ( γ s,k,l ( F ))   ,   (30b) where   γ s,k,l ( F )   indicates   that   F   is   the   only   independent variable with other variables fixed. Subsequently, the corre- sponding surrogate function is then obtained as  R F  s,k ( F ; ̂   F ) =   ∑  l ∈L  W  (  f s,k  (  φ F  s,k,l ( ̂   F ) log 2  (  eγ s,k,l ( ̂ F )  )  + ζ F  s,k,l ( ̂ F )  )  − log 2 ( e ) φ F  s,k,l ( ̂   F ) γ s,k,l ( ̂ F )   N 0 W   +   I s,k,l ( F )  | h s,k,k | 2 p ∗  s,k,l  )  −   κ ( f s,k   − ̂   f s,k ) 2 ,   (31) where   F   is the only independent variables in   I s,k,l ( F ) , similar to   γ s,k,l ( F ) , and   κ   >   0   is the regularization coefficient. Moreover, it can be certified that   R F  s,k ( F ; ̂   F )   is concave in  F , and the following proposition holds.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8139  Proposition 2:   The surrogate function   R F  s,k ( F ; ̂   F )   is a lower bound of   R s,k ( F ) , and is tangent to   R s,k ( F )   at the point ̂   F .  Proof:   See Appendix B. Consequently, during the   θ -th round in problem (P1- θ ), if the solution obtained by MM algorithm at the   ψ -th iteration is denoted as   ˜ F [ ψ ] , then the problem to be solved at the   ( ψ +1) -th iteration is further formulated as  ( P1- θ - ψ ) : min  F [ n ]   Λ( F ,   P ∗ ,   B ∗ ;   V   ) +   J ( θ ) ( F ;  ˜ F [ ψ ] )   (32) s.t.   (13c) ,   (13d) ,   (13g) ,   (13l) ,   and (25) , x s,k M 0   ≤   R F  s,k ( F ;  ˜ F [ ψ ] ) T 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,  ∀   k   ∈ K ,   (32a) where (32a) is derived by replacing   R s,k   in (13k) with its surrogate function   R F  s,k ( F ;  ˜ F [ ψ ] ) . As a result, the problem (P1-  θ - ψ ) becomes a convex problem that can be directly solved with optimization toolbox such as GUROBI.  Algorithm 2   MPMM for BH Pattern   F  Require:   F { i } ,   P { i } ,   B { i } , round and iteration numbers  Θ ,   Ψ .  Ensure:   F { i +1 } .  1:   Init:   initial point   F (0) , coefficients   α (1)  s,k ,   β (1) , and   ρ .  2:   P ∗   ←   P { i } ,   B ∗   ←   B { i } .  3:   for   round   θ   = 1   to   Θ   do  4:   ˜ F [0]   ←   F ( θ − 1) .  5:   for   iteration   ψ   = 1   to   Ψ   do  6:   Given   ˜ F [ ψ − 1] , solve (P1- θ - ψ ) and obtain   ˜ F [ ψ ] .  7:   Update (P1- θ - ψ ) based on   ˜ F [ ψ ] .  8:   end for  9:   F ( θ )   ←   ˜ F [Ψ] , update   α ( θ +1)  s,k   ,   β ( θ +1)   in (P1- θ ).  10:   end for  11:   Quantize   F (Θ)   into a binary matrix.  12:   if   Λ( F (Θ) ,   P ∗ ,   B ∗ ;   V   )   ≤   Λ( F { i } ,   P ∗ ,   B ∗ ;   V   )   then  13:   F { i +1 }   ←   F (Θ) .  14:   else  15:   F { i +1 }   ←   F { i } .  16:   end if  The details for optimizing BH pattern   F   are provided in  Algorithm   2. The MP method is employed to optimize the binary variables through multiple rounds, as outlined in Steps 1 ∼ 10. Meanwhile, within each round, the MM algorithm is further utilized to iteratively solve the original problem. Once the number of iterations reaches the upper limit   Ψ ,  ˜ F [Ψ]   is taken as the solution for the   θ -th round, denoted by  F ( θ ) . Subsequently,   J ( θ +1) ( F )   is updated accordingly, and the problem (P1- θ ) is subsequently adjusted to initiate the   ( θ   +1) - th round for solving the problem (P1) until reach the round limit   Θ . Finally, the result   F (Θ)   is quantized, and the superior one between   F (Θ)   and   F { i }   is selected, ensuring a continuous reduction in the value of   Λ( F ,   P ,   B ;   V   ) .  B. SCA for Resource Management  With the fixed BH pattern   F ∗   and load balancing   B ∗ , the subproblem on resource management for joint optimization of power and frequency segment is established as  ( P2 ) : min  P   Λ( F ∗ ,   P ,   B ∗ ;   V   )   (33) s.t. (13e) ,   (13f) ,   (13g) ,   (13k) ,   and (13l) ,  where the objective function is linear with   P . For the achiev- able rate   R s,k , the following expression can be derived as  ∂ 2 R s,k  ∂p 2  s,j,l  =   W f s,k | h s,k,j   | 4 f   2  s,j   γ s,k,l (2 +   γ s,k,l ) ln 2( I s,k,l   +   N 0 W   ) 2 (1 +   γ s,k,l ) 2   ≥   0 ,   (34) which indicates that the constraint (13k) is non-convex in subproblem (P2). Therefore, the SCA technique is employed to transform the original non-convex problem into a series of convex problems by constructing an approximation function of   R s,k ( P )   and updating it iteratively. Similarly, following auxiliary variables dependent on   P   are defined as  η P  s,k,l ( P ) =   | h s,k,k | 2 f   ∗  s,k  N 0 W   +   I s,k,l ( P )   ,   (35a)  φ P  s,k,l ( P ) =   γ s,k,l ( P ) 1 +   γ s,k,l ( P )   ,   (35b)  ζ P  s,k,l ( P ) = log 2   (1 +   γ s,k,l ( P ))  −   φ P  s,k,l ( P ) log 2   ( γ s,k,l ( P ))   .   (35c) Hence, the approximation function can be expressed as  R P  s,k ( P ; ̂   P ) =   ∑  l ∈L  W  (  f   ∗  s,k  ( φ P  s,k,l ( ̂   P ) log 2  (  eη P  s,k,l ( ̂ P ) p s,k,l  )  +   ζ P  s,k,l ( ̂ P ) ) − log 2 ( e ) φ P  s,k,l ( ̂ P ) η P  s,k,l ( ̂   P )   N 0 W + I s,k,l ( P )  | h s,k,k | 2  )  ,  (36) where the first term is a logarithmic function of   p s,k,l , and the latter one is linear with   P , making   R P  s,k ( P ; ̂   P )   a concave function. Moreover, similar to the properties in   Proposition  2, this approximation function serves as a lower bound for  R s,k ( P )   and is tangent to it at the point ̂   P . As a result, assuming that the solution obtained for the   ξ - th iteration of problem (P2) is   P [ ξ ] , the subproblem for the  ( ξ   + 1) -th iteration can be expressed as  ( P2- ξ ) : min  P   Λ( F ∗ ,   P ,   B ∗ ;   V   )   (37) s.t.   (13e) ,   (13f) ,   (13g) ,   and (13l) , x s,k M 0   ≤   R P  s,k ( P ;   P [ ξ ] ) T 0 ,   ∀   s   ∈ S ,   ∀ k   ∈ K ,  (37a) where the constraint (37a) is convex by substituting   R s,k ( P )  with the approximation function. Therefore, the problem (P2-  ξ )   is   a   convex   problem   and   can   be   solved   conveniently. Consequently, the optimization of the resource management   P  with the SCA is presented in   Algorithm   3, where the initial value   P [0]   is set to the resource management matrix   P { i }  obtained in the previous loop of the BCD algorithm.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8140   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  Algorithm 3   SCA for Resource Management   P  Require:   F { i +1 } ,   P { i } ,   B { i } , iteration number   Ξ .  Ensure:   P { i +1 } .  1:   Init:   feasible point   P [0]   ←   P { i } .  2:   F ∗   ←   F { i +1 } ,   B ∗   ←   B { i } .  3:   for   ξ   = 1   to   Ξ   do  4: ̂   P   ←   P [ ξ − 1] .  5:   Construct   the   approximation   function   R P  s,k ( P ; ̂   P )  according to (36).  6:   Solve (P2- ξ ) and obtain   P [ ξ ] .  7:   end for  8:   P { i +1 }   ←   P [Ξ] .  C. Quadratic Programming for Load Balancing  After determining BH pattern   F ∗   and resource management  P ∗ , the subproblem for load balancing   B   is established as  ( P3 ) : min  B   Λ( F ∗ ,   P ∗ ,   B ;   V   )   (38) s.t.   (13h) ,   (13i) ,   (13j) ,   and (13l) ,  where   d s,k   is linear with   B   as indicated in (6), and thus the quadratic term in the objective is convex. Besides, the constraints (13h), (13i), and (13l) are also linear with   B . However, for the amount of bidirectionally transferred packets  c r,s   through the laser ISL, the absolute value terms of   B  are included in (5). Therefore, auxiliary variables   b +  r,s,k   are introduced, and the following constraints are imposed as  b +  r,s,k   ≥   b r,s,k ,   (39a)  b +  r,s,k   ≥ − b r,s,k ,   (39b)  c r,s   =   ∑  k ∈K  b +  r,s,k .   (39c) Since   the   objective   function   and   constraint   (13j)   tend   to reduce   c r,s , exactly one of the inequalities between con- straints   (39a)   and   (39b)   holds   with   equality   in   the   final solution, which ensures the equivalence of the solution after incorporating these constraints. Therefore, the objective func- tion   of   this   subproblem   is   a   quadratic   convex   problem, while   all   constraints   can   be   transformed   into   linear   con- straints, allowing the problem to be solved via quadratic programming.  D. Convergence Analysis and Computational Complexity  For   the   convergence   of   each   sub-problem,   the   MPMM method   for   the   problem   (P1)   has   been   proved   to   be convergent   in   [41]   and   [42].   Moreover,   in   terms   of   the problem (P2), since   R P  s,k ( P ;   P [ ξ ] )   serves as a lower bound of   R s,k ( P ) , the optimal solution of (P2- ξ ) is feasible for (P2),   and   the   objective   function   is   ensured   to   be   non- increasing at each iteration. Therefore, the result sequence  { Λ( F ∗ ,   P [ ξ ] ,   B ∗ ;   V   ) | ξ   = 1 ,   2 , . . . }   is monotone and bounded, ensuring its convergence. Additionally, the optimal solution to the problem (P3) can be obtained directly via quadratic programming. Therefore, for the BCD algorithm, its objective value is non- increasing in each optimization step as  Λ( F { i } , P { i } , B { i } ; V   )   ≤   Λ( F { i +1 } , P { i } , B { i } ; V   )  ≤   Λ( F { i +1 } , P { i +1 } , B { i } ; V   )   ≤   Λ( F { i +1 } , P { i +1 } , B { i +1 } ; V   ) .  (40) Additionally, because the transmission power is constrained by   P max   and the queue lengths are non-negative, the objec- tive function has a lower bound. Consequently, the sequence of objective values generated by each optimization step is monotonically non-increasing and bounded, ensuring the con- vergence of the BCD algorithm. For the computational complexity, in terms of   Algorithm  2, given that the accuracy of the solution is    1 , the complexity of solving convex problem (P1- θ - ψ ) with the interior-point method (IPM) is   O   ( ( |S||K| ) 3 . 5   log(1 / 1 ) )   [43]. Moreover, both the MP and MM algorithms exhibit linear convergence [41], [42], and thus the round and iteration numbers are  Θ   =   O (log(1 / 1 )) ,   Ψ   =   O (log(1 / 1 )) .   Therefore,   the computational complexity   ω 1   of   Algorithm   2 can be expressed as   ω 1   =   O   ( ( |S||K| ) 3 . 5 (log(1 / 1 )) 3 ) . Given   the   precision    2   for   Algorithm   3,   the   itera- tion   number   Ξ   =   O (log(1 / 2 )) ,   and   the   complexity of   solving   convex   optimization   problem   (P2- ξ )   by   IPM is   O   ( ( |S||K||L| ) 3 . 5   log(1 / 2 ) ) . Consequently, the computa- tional complexity is   ω 2   =   O   ( ( |S||K||L| ) 3 . 5 (log(1 / 2 )) 2 ) . Moreover, the computational complexity of quadratic pro- gramming for load balancing can be calculated as   ω 3   =  O   ( ( |S| 2 |K| ) 3 . 5   log(1 / 3 ) )   with the precision    3 . In summary, each loop of the BCD algorithm in   Algorithm  1, encompassing the implementation of the three aforemen- tioned   algorithms,   can   be   completed   in   polynomial   time. Moreover, the loop limit is set as   Π , and the total computa- tional complexity of the proposed method is   ω 0   =   O (Π( ω 1   +  ω 2   +   ω 3 )) . V. S IMULATION   R ESULTS  The simulation parameters and the implementation of the proposed method are discussed in Section V-A. Additionally, in   Section   V-B,   the   convergence   results   of   the   proposed method are illustrated, along with its performance under differ- ent parameters. Besides, comparisons with other benchmarks are provided in Section V-C.  A. Simulation Parameters and Implementation  The simulation parameters are summarized in Table II. A Walker constellation with an orbital altitude of 1,000 km and an inclination of 85 ◦   is employed, where the distance between two adjacent satellites is set to 207 km to align with the cell coverage configuration. The specifications of the laser ISLs are based on the CONDOR laser terminal developed by Mynaric [40]. The time slot duration is set to 10 ms [12], and each simulation consists of 1,500 time slots, corresponding to a total duration of 15 seconds. Due to the short simulation period, the satellite-to-cell coverage relationships, i.e.,   Ω( s )  and   Φ( k ) , are assumed to remain constant [20], [37], [44], while the laser ISL performance is also considered stable,  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8141  TABLE II S IMULATION   P ARAMETERS  as the inter-satellite distance changes insignificantly. For data transmission, the carrier frequency is set to 20 GHz in the Ka- band [20], while the radiation patterns of the transmitter and receiver antennas follow ITU-R S.1528 [45] and ITU-R S.465- 6 [46], respectively. Accordingly, the channel coefficients are calculated based on models in [12], [15], and [16], and are updated in each time slot. For other channel models, the proposed method remains applicable as long as the channel coefficients can be modeled as Markov processes, while its performance is still ensured by   Proposition   1, as demonstrated in Appendix A. In addition, the average packet arrival rate for each cell is uniformly distributed between 80 Mbps and 320 Mbps, with a gradual drift occurring every 50 time slots. Moreover, the number of arriving packets follows a Poisson distribution [21]. For the implementation of the proposed method, a cen- tralized architecture is adopted, where a designated node is responsible for multi-satellite synchronization and centralized information   collection,   including   the   current   buffer   queue lengths, channel state information, and spectrum overlapping status with GSO ground stations from all satellites. Given that the BH pattern selection, resource management, and load balancing have polynomial time computational complexity, the proposed method achieves high computational efficiency when implemented on an application-specific integrated circuit [47]. Moreover, due to the extremely high transmission rate of laser ISLs [40], the dominant portion of algorithm execution time is attributed to the propagation delay in inter-satellite communication. Meanwhile, in the simulation, the distance between two adjacent satellites is set as 207 km to align with the cell coverage configuration, resulting in a round- trip propagation delay per laser ISL of approximately 1.38 ms. For small-scale constellations, such latency allows the satellites to implement information exchange within each time slot, ensuring the feasibility of multi-satellite collaboration.  Fig. 2. The iteration curves of the BCD algorithm in various satellite numbers.  For larger-scale constellations, the system can be partitioned into multiple regions, with each performing coordination inde- pendently. With   the   ongoing   advancement   of   non-terrestrial   net- works and satellite communication standards, the proposed method   is   expected   to   facilitate   the   integration   of   multi- satellite collaboration into mainstream standards such as 3GPP, thereby accelerating its practical deployment in LEO satellite- terrestrial communication systems. In addition, the subsequent simulation results demonstrate that the proposed multi-satellite collaboration approach achieves superior performance under typical scenarios and parameter settings, highlighting its prac- tical value and application potential.  B. Performance in Different Parameters  In Fig. 2, the iteration curves of the objective function value  Λ( F ,   P ,   B ;   V   )   obtained at the end of each loop in the BCD algorithm for (P0-2) with varying numbers of LEO satellites are presented. To ensure a fair comparison, the average queue length at each satellite is uniformly distributed between 0 and 4,000, while the trade-off coefficient   V   is set to 200. It is observed that the objective function decreases rapidly during the initial loop and stabilizes after about four loops. These results indicate that the proposed BCD algorithm is always effective regardless of the number of satellites. In addition, the average queue length and energy con- sumption performance of LEO satellite communications for different trade-off coefficients   V   are illustrated in Fig. 3, with communication demand of 20 Gbps, and the results are averaged over 30 time slots. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the average queue length increases proportionally with   V   . Moreover, for each value of   V   , the queue length eventually stabilizes, indicating that the service capacity of LEO satellites is sufficient to meet the communication demands, thereby satisfying constraint (13a). Meanwhile, in Fig. 3(b), the energy performance is represented by the power   E s /T 0   per time slot. It can be observed that, as   V   increases, the energy consumption decreases gradually, though at a diminishing rate, which reflects the trade-off of   O ( V   )   ∼ O (1 /V   )   between the average queue length and energy consumption, as outlined in  Proposition   1. Moreover, the queue length is proportional to  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8142   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  Fig. 3.   The performance per time slot versus (a) the average queue length and (b) the average power when the communication demand is 20 Gbps.  Fig. 4.   The average power for various interference thresholds under different laser ISL transfer limits.  the average queuing latency, which implies that reducing the energy consumption comes at the cost of increased queuing latency. Therefore, selecting an appropriate trade-off coeffi- cient is crucial. Since the case of   V   = 200   yields lower energy consumption while maintaining a moderate queue length, it is applied in subsequent simulations.  Fig. 5.   The average demands and throughputs for four representative cells.  Moreover, in Fig. 4, the energy consumption required to satisfy a communication demand of 20 Gbps is presented under   varying   interference   thresholds   at   the   GSO   ground station with different laser ISL transfer limits. When the interference threshold is strictly constrained, higher energy consumption is required due to limited available spectrum resources. As the interference threshold is gradually higher, the energy consumption correspondingly decreases. It is observed that increasing the laser ISL transfer limit can also reduce the energy consumption with various interference thresholds. This is because satellites severely affected by interference con- straints tend to accumulate longer queues, while the proposed real-time load balancing scheme transfers packets to nearby satellites with lower interference based on the queue lengths. Hence, the proposed method effectively suppresses the inter- ference in co-existing systems. Moreover, with more packets allowed for laser ISL transfer, lower energy consumption is achieved, which is attributed to improved handling of non- uniform distribution of communication demands by real-time load balancing, avoiding overloading any single satellite and thereby reducing the average energy consumption of LEO satellite communications. Meanwhile, in Fig. 5, four representative cells are selected, including those with the lowest and highest average demands and two others with moderate demand levels, where their average demands and average throughputs are depicted. Since initial queue lengths are set to zero, several beginning time slots are required to reach steady state, and only the steady- state results are presented. It is observed that despite significant differences   and   temporal   fluctuations   in   average   demands among the cells, the average throughput in each cell closely follows   its   demand.   This   demonstrates   that   the   proposed method fairly satisfies the service requirements across all cells. Consequently, the fairness among cells is achieved.  C. Comparison With Other Benchmarks  In this paper, the performance of the following benchmarks are compared with the proposed method: 1)   DRL for BH pattern   [21],   which   employs   DRL   to   determine   the   BH pattern, followed by resource management and load balancing based on the selected pattern. Specifically, the state of the DRL  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8143  Fig. 6.   The average power of different methods on various communication demands with unlimited storage volume.  includes channel coefficients   h s,k,j   [ n ] ,   g s,k,j   [ n ] , and queue length   Q [ n ] , while the reward in each time slot is defined by (19). Additionally, the QMIX architecture with centralized training and distributed execution is utilized [21]. 2)   Pre- scheduling   [20], where the total volume of the data packets arriving in each cell among the future 50 time slots is estimated via traffic prediction, based on which the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing are scheduled in advance. 3)   No frequency division , where the power of frequency segments overlapping with the GSO ground station is set to zero, while equal power is assigned to the remaining frequency segments in each beam, but the power can be various among different beams. 4)   Without load balancing , where the load balancing component is removed from the proposed method. 5)   Maximal   USWG   [18], where the weight of each cell is determined by its queue length and latency, with higher- weighted cells prioritized for service. The average energy consumption of various approaches under different communication demands is illustrated in Fig. 6, with the fixed trade-off coefficient   V   = 200. Moreover, it is assumed that each satellite has sufficient storage volume, i.e., no packet loss occurs. Among all methods, the proposed approach consistently exhibits the lowest average power con- sumption, whereas the DRL for BH pattern method performs slightly worse due to the challenges of adapting to time- varying   characteristics   and   insufficient   information   during distributed execution. In addition, DRL requires substantial computational resources and training samples during offline learning. Meanwhile, it can be observed that as commu- nication demand increases, the power consumption of the pre-scheduling scheme gradually approaches that of the pro- posed method, since higher communication demand leads to increased queue lengths, reducing the impact of traffic arrival randomness. Besides, no frequency division method results in inferior performance due to the reduced flexibility for resource management. For the benchmark without load balancing, some satellites become overloaded as the communication demand increases, leading to a significant rise in energy consump-  Fig. 7.   The average power of different methods on various communication demands with limited storage volume.  tion, while the maximal USWG scheme fails to account for the time-varying characteristics, resulting in deficient perfor- mance. Particularly, when the communication demand is 20 Gbps, the proposed method reduces the average power by 5.28%, 2.17%, 6.68%, 25.54%, and 30.92%, compared with DRL for BH pattern, pre-scheduling, no frequency division, without load balancing, and maximal USWG, respectively. Meanwhile, in Fig. 7, the storage volume of each satellite is limited to 350 Mbit, and the excess packets are dropped, where the dashed lines in the curves indicate that packet loss occurs. The proposed method can satisfy all communication demands within the range of   15   ∼   20   Gbps, demonstrating its effectiveness in maintaining the queue stability. Nevertheless, the DRL for BH pattern method begins experiencing packet loss   at   19.5   Gbps,   while   the   pre-scheduling   scheme   also experiences packet loss at this point, due to its neglect of the randomness in traffic arrival. Additionally, packet loss appears earlier in other methods, and although the method without load balancing has less energy consumption than the maximal USWG scheme, the packet loss occurs earlier since some satellites are overloaded. In addition, the average power consumption and queue length of all algorithms are illustrated in Fig. 8 under a communication demand of 17.5 Gbps, at which all methods are capable of fully satisfying the communication demand, and the results are obtained by varying the trade-off coefficient  V   .   It   can   be   seen   that   increases   in   energy   consumption yield minimal reductions in queue length once the energy consumption becomes sufficiently high, and the queue length sharply increases as the energy consumption reduces to a certain threshold, clearly demonstrating the trade-off between queueing latency and energy consumption proposed in   Propo- sition   1, and underscoring the importance of selecting an appropriate trade-off coefficient   V   . Moreover, the proposed method consistently achieves both the lowest energy consump- tion and the shortest queue length under the same conditions. While the DRL for BH pattern method shows comparable performance under moderate conditions, e.g., average power  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8144   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  Fig. 8.   The average power and queue length curves under different methods.  Fig. 9.   The average power and queue length curves in a small-scale scenario under the exhaustive-search-based optimal solution and other methods.  around 30 W, but deteriorates in other scenarios. For the pre-scheduling scheme, as the queue length increases, its per- formance approaches that of the proposed method, consistent with previous findings. In contrast, the no frequency division method consistently underperforms the proposed approach, and both the method without load balancing and the maximal USWG scheme exhibit inferior performance. Therefore, the superiority of the proposed method has been demonstrated in terms of reducing the energy consumption and satisfying the communication demands of LEO satellites. Additionally, to illustrate the gap between the proposed method and the possible optimal solution, a small-scale sce- nario   is   simulated   in   Fig.   9,   involving   2   satellites,   each equipped with 2 beams, covering 12 terrestrial cells, with the communication demand set at 2.5 Gbps. The trade-off between the average power and average queue length for various methods is evaluated. Specifically, the optimal solution is   obtained   through   an   exhaustive   search   for   comparison with other algorithms. It can be observed that the proposed method remains closest to the optimal solution across all the benchmarks. Additionally, due to the limited number of satellites and coverage cells in this small-scale scenario, the negative impact of the benchmark without load balancing is less pronounced than that in Fig. 8. Moreover, the trends of the remaining methods are similar to those observed in Fig. 8 and inferior to the proposed method. VI. C ONCLUSION  In this paper, the long-term average energy minimization problem in LEO satellite communications was addressed. By jointly considering the BH pattern, resource management, and load balancing, the proposed method guaranteed the queue sta- bility and interference suppression while significantly reducing the long-term average energy consumption. Specifically, the Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty method transformed the long-term problem into optimization within each time slot. Moreover, the BCD algorithm was employed to alternately optimize different variables. In particular, the BH pattern was obtained via the MPMM approach, while the non-convex constraints in the subproblem of resource management were handled by the SCA technique, and real-time load balancing was realized through quadratic programming. Simulation results demonstrated that the proposed method substantially reduced the energy con- sumption while maintaining the queue stability and ensuring that the interference to co-existing systems remained below the prescribed threshold, outperforming other benchmarks. In conclusion, the proposed method offers a valuable view for LEO satellite communications with limited SWaP. A PPENDIX   A P ROOF OF   P ROPOSITION   1 In   a   policy   that   depends   only   on   the   current   channel coefficients, the variables are denoted as ̂   a s,k , ̂   d s,k , ̂   x s,k , and ̂  E s , and then for all these policies, including the optimal policy, the following inequality for one-slot drift is given by  ˜ L [ ν ] =   L q [ ν   + 1]   −   L q [ ν ]  L 0  +   V E 0  ∑  s ∈S  E s [ ν ]   (41)  ≤   Υ 1  L 0  +   1  L 0  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (   1 2   d 2  s,k [ ν ] +   q s,k [ ν ]( a s,k [ ν ] +   d s,k [ ν ]  −   x s,k [ ν ])  )  +   V E 0  ∑  s ∈S  E s [ ν ]   (41a)  ≤   Υ 1  L 0  +   1  L 0  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (   1 2 ̂   d 2  s,k [ ν ] +   q s,k [ ν ]( ̂ a s,k [ ν ] + ̂   d s,k [ ν ]  − ̂   x s,k [ ν ])  )  +   V E 0  ∑  s ∈S ̂  E s [ ν ]   (41b)  ≤   1  L 0  (  (2( ν   −   n 0 ) + 1)Υ 1   +   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  ( ν   −   n 0 ) d 2 max  )  +   1  L 0  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  (   1 2 ̂   d 2  s,k [ ν ] +   q s,k [ n 0 ]( ̂ a s,k [ ν ] + ̂   d s,k [ ν ]  − ̂   x s,k [ ν ])  )  +   V E 0  ∑  s ∈S ̂  E s [ ν ] ,   (41c) where   ν   ≥   n 0 , and (41a) holds according to (18). Moreover, due to the result obtained by the problem (P0-2) aims to  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8145  minimize (41a), the inequality (41b) is true for all other policies, while (41c) holds due to the following formula as  q s,k [ ν ] =   q s,k [ n 0 ] +  ν − 1 ∑  n = n 0  ( a s,k [ n ] +   d s,k [ n ]   −   x s,k [ n ]) .   (42) By substituting it into (41b) and scaling the result to its upper bound, the inequality (41c) can be derived. As indicated in [38], the channel coefficients in satellite- terrestrial   communications   can   be   modeled   as   a   Markov process. It is assumed that at the   n 0 -th time slot, the channel is in initial state, and   n r   denotes the time slot index at which the channel returns to the initial state for the   r -th time. In addition, the recurrence time, expressed in terms of the number of time slots, is defined as the random variable   u . Therefore, by summing   ˜ L [ ν ]   from the   n r   -th time slot to the   ( n r +1   −   1) - th time slot, the inequality for multi-slot drift   L r   is obtained as  L r   =   E  {  L q [ n r +1 ]   −   L q [ n r   ]  L 0  +   V E 0  n r +1 − 1  ∑  n = n r  ∑  s ∈S  E s [ n ]  ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ Q [ n r   ]  }  ≤   Υ 2  L 0  +   E { u }  (   1  L 0  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  q s,k [ n r   ] E { ̂ a s,k [ n ] + ̂   d s,k [ n ]   − ̂   x s,k [ n ] }   +   V E 0  ∑  s ∈S  E { ̂   E s [ n ] }  )  ,   (43) where   Υ 2   is a constant term defined as  Υ 2   =   E   { u 2 }  (  Υ 1   +   ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  d 2 max  2  )  +   E { u } E  { ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  d 2  s,k [ n ]   −   d 2 max  2  }  .   (44) Inequality   (43)   holds   because   in   an   irreducible   recurrent Markov chain, each recurrence time is independently and identically distributed, and the policy depends only on the current channel coefficients. Moreover, the optimal policy has the following properties as  E { ̂   a s,k [ n ] + ̂   d s,k [ n ]   − ̂   x s,k [ n ] } ≤   0 ,   (45a)  ∑  s ∈S  E { ̂ E s [ n ] }   =   E opt .   (45b) Substituting (45a) and (45b) into (43), we have an upper bound of multi-slot drift   L r   as  L r   ≤   Υ 2  L 0  +   V E 0  E { u }E opt .   (46) Considering the duration from the   n 0 -th to   n R -th time slot, which corresponds to the   R -th return to the initial state, the above formula (46) is accumulated from the   n 0 -th to   ( n R   − 1) - th time slot, yielding the   R -return drift as  R− 1 ∑  r =0  L r   =   E { L q [ n R ] } −   E { L q [ n 0 ] }  L 0  +   V E 0  R E { u }E   (47a)  ≤  R Υ 2  L 0  +   V E 0  R E { u }E opt .   (47b) Dividing both (47a) and (47b) by   R , and letting   R   approach infinity yields  E ≤ E opt   +   E 0 Υ 2  V L 0 E { u }   ,   (48) thereby verifying (21). For the average queue length, when the Slater condition holds, a channel coefficient based policy can satisfy that  E { ̂ a s,k [ n ] + ̂   d s,k [ n ]   − ̂   x s,k [ n ] } ≤ − δ <   0 ,   (49a)  ∑  s ∈S  E { ̂   E s [ n ] }   = ̂   E .   (49b) Similar to (46) and (47), by calculating the   R -return drift and taking the limit, the average queue length can be derived as  lim  |N |→∞  1  |N |   E  { ∑  n ∈N  ∑  s ∈S  ∑  k ∈K  q s,k [ n ]  }  ≤   1  δ  (  Υ 2  E { u }   +   V L 0 ̂   E  E 0  )  ,  (50) thereby approving (22).     A PPENDIX   B P ROOF OF   P ROPOSITION   2 Consider the logarithmic function   w 1 ( γ ) = log 2 (1 +   γ ) . According to [48], a lower bound for   w 1 ( γ )   is defined as  w 1 ( γ ) =   ˆ γ  1 + ˆ γ   log 2 ( γ ) + log 2 (1 + ˆ γ )   −   ˆ γ  1 + ˆ γ   log 2 (ˆ γ ) .   (51) This   bound   satisfies   the   conditions   as   w 1 (ˆ γ )   =  w 1 (ˆ γ ) ,   dw 1  dγ   | γ =ˆ γ   =   dw 1  dγ   | γ =ˆ γ   . Substituting (51) into   R s,k ( F )  leads to the inequality as  R s,k ( F )   ≥   ∑  l ∈L  W f s,k  (  ζ F  s,k,l ( ̂   F ) − φ F  s,k,l ( ̂ F ) log 2  (   1  γ s,k,l ( F )  ))  .  (52) Focusing on the first term in (52), a new function   w 2 ( γ ) = log 2   (1 /γ )   is defined, which admits an upper bound as  w 2 ( γ ) =  ˆ γ   log 2 ( e )  γ   −   log 2 ( e ˆ γ ) .   (53) Similar to   w 1 ( γ ) , it holds that   w 2 (ˆ γ ) =   w 2 (ˆ γ ) ,   dw 2  dγ   | γ =ˆ γ   =  dw 2  dγ   | γ =ˆ γ   . Therefore, the following inequality is derived as  R s,k ( F )   ≥   ∑  l ∈L  W  ( ( φ F  s,k,l ( ̂ F ) log 2  (  eγ s,k,l ( ̂ F )  )  +   ζ F  s,k,l ( ̂   F ) ) f s,k  −   log 2 ( e ) φ F  s,k,l ( ̂ F ) γ s,k,l ( ̂ F )   N 0 W   +   I s,k,l ( F )  | h s,k,k | 2 p ∗  s,k,l  )  .  (54) Since the right term is linear in   F , a regularization term  − κ ( f s,k   − ̂   f s,k ) 2   is added in (31) to ensure the strong con- cavity. By applying variable substitutions into (52) and (54) along with the chain rule, the   Proposition   2 is confirmed.     Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8146   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 25, 2026  R EFERENCES [1]   G. Wang, F. Yang, J. Liu, J. Song, and Z. Han, “Joint beam hopping and power allocation for energy-efficient IoT in multi-satellite networks,” in  Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops , Dec. 2025. [2]   X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “LEO/VLEO satellite communications in 6G and beyond networks–technologies, applications, and challenges,”  IEEE Netw. , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 273–285, Sep. 2024. [3]   Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, H. Cao, and J. Shi, “Broadband LEO satellite communications: Architectures and key technologies,”   IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 55–61, Apr. 2019. [4]   G. Wang, F. Yang, J. Song, and Z. Han, “Free space optical communi- cation for inter-satellite link: Architecture, potentials and trends,”   IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 110–116, Mar. 2024. [5]   I.   del   Portillo,   B.   G.   Cameron,   and   E.   F.   Crawley,   “A   technical comparison of three low Earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide global broadband,”   Acta Astronautica , vol. 159, pp. 123–135, Jun. 2019. [6]   X. Zhu and C. Jiang, “Integrated satellite-terrestrial networks toward 6G: Architectures, applications, and challenges,”   IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 437–461, Jan. 2022. [7]   M.   Jalali,   F.   Ortiz,   E.   Lagunas,   S.   Kisseleff,   L.   Emiliani,   and S. Chatzinotas, “Joint power and tilt control in satellite constellation for NGSO-GSO interference mitigation,”   IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. , vol. 4, pp. 545–557, 2023. [8]   Y. Sun, Y. Zhai, W. Wu, P. Si, and F. Richard Yu, “Handover for multi- beam LEO satellite networks: A multi-objective reinforcement learning method,”   IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2834–2838, Dec. 2024. [9]   C. Ding, J.-B. Wang, M. Cheng, M. Lin, and J. Cheng, “Dynamic trans- mission and computation resource optimization for dense LEO satellite assisted mobile-edge computing,”   IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 3087–3102, May 2023. [10]   M. Khammassi, A. Kammoun, and M.-S. Alouini, “Precoding for high- throughput satellite communication systems: A survey,”   IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 80–118, 1st Quart., 2024. [11]   D. Kim, H. Jung, I.-H. Lee, and D. Niyato, “Multibeam management and resource allocation for LEO satellite-assisted IoT networks,”   IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 19443–19458, Jun. 2025. [12]   R. Wang, M. Chen, L. Xu, Z. Wen, Y. Wei, and S. Li, “Multi-dimensional resource allocation for covert communications in multi-beam low-Earth- orbit satellite systems,”   Electronics , vol. 13, no. 17, p. 3561, Sep. 2024. [13]   Study on New Radio (NR) To Support Non Terrestrial Networks , docu- ment TR 38.811, 3GPP, Sep. 2020. [14]   J. Wang, C. Qi, S. Yu, and S. Mao, “Joint beamforming and illumination pattern design for beam-hopping LEO satellite communications,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 18940–18950, Dec. 2024. [15]   J. Zhang et al., “System-level evaluation of beam hopping in NR-based LEO satellite communication system,” in   Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC) , Mar. 2023, pp. 1–6. [16]   A. Wang, L. Lei, E. Lagunas, A. I. P´ erez-Neira, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “Joint optimization of beam-hopping design and NOMA- assisted transmission for flexible satellite systems,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 8846–8858, Oct. 2022. [17]   X. Du, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and W. Wang, “Dynamic resource allocation for beam hopping satellites communication system: An exploration,” in   Proc.   IEEE   Int.   Conf.   Trust,   Secur.   Privacy   Comput.   Commun. (TrustCom) , Dec. 2022, pp. 1296–1301. [18]   Z. Wu, P. Ren, and D. Xu, “Flexible resource allocation for differentiated QoS provisioning in beam-hopping satellite communications system,” in  Proc. IEEE 95th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Spring) , Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2022, pp. 1–5. [19]   X. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Liao, Z. Liu, W. Wang, and F. M. Ghannouchi, “Dynamic beam hopping method based on multi-objective deep rein- forcement learning for next generation satellite broadband systems,”  IEEE Trans. Broadcast. , vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 630–646, Sep. 2020. [20]   Z. Lin, Z. Ni, L. Kuang, C. Jiang, and Z. Huang, “Multi-satellite beam hopping based on load balancing and interference avoidance for NGSO satellite communication systems,”   IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 282–295, Jan. 2023. [21]   Z. Lin, Z. Ni, L. Kuang, C. Jiang, and Z. Huang, “Satellite-terrestrial coordinated multi-satellite beam hopping scheduling based on multi- agent deep reinforcement learning,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10091–10103, Aug. 2024. [22]   G. Wang, F. Yang, J. Song, and Z. Han, “Resource allocation and load balancing for beam hopping scheduling in satellite-terrestrial com- munications: A cooperative satellite approach,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1339–1354, Feb. 2025. [23]   Z. Lin, Z. Ni, L. Kuang, C. Jiang, and Z. Huang, “NGSO satellites beam hopping strategy based on load balancing and interference avoidance for coexistence with GSO systems,”   IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 278–282, Jan. 2023. [24]   J. Zhu, Y. Sun, and M. Peng, “Beam management in low Earth orbit satellite communication with handover frequency control and satellite- terrestrial spectrum sharing,”   IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 5247–5263, Jul. 2025. [25]   X. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Lee, and N. B. Shroff, “Delay-optimal and energy-efficient communications with Markovian arrivals,”   IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1508–1523, Mar. 2020. [26]   Y. Wang, W. Chen, and H. V. Poor, “Ultra-reliable and low-latency wire- less communications in the high SNR regime: A cross-layer tradeoff,”  IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 149–162, Jan. 2022. [27]   C. Li, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “Achieving low latency in massive access: A mean-field approach,”   IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1473–1488, May 2022. [28]   M. Neely,   Stochastic Network Optimization With Application to Com- munication and Queueing Systems . Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022. [29]   Z. Xie and W. Chen, “Pilot-efficient scheduling for large-scale antenna aided massive machine-type communications: A cross-layer approach,”  IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 4262–4276, Jul. 2020. [30]   J. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Nan, Y. Sun, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Optimizing task-specific timeliness with edge-assisted scheduling for status update,”  IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory , vol. 4, pp. 624–638, 2023. [31]   J. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Han, J. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Lyapunov-assisted decentralized dynamic offloading strategy based on deep reinforcement learning,”   IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 8368–8380, Apr. 2025. [32]   G. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and J. Song, “Minimizing age of infor- mation in downlink wireless networks with time-varying channels and peak power constraint,”   IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 9058–9068, Jul. 2023. [33]   M. J. Neely, E. Modiano, and C. E. Rohrs, “Power allocation and routing in multibeam satellites with time-varying channels,”   IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 138–152, Feb. 2003. [34]   M. Safavi and B. Landfeldt, “Energy-efficient stable and balanced task scheduling in data centers,”   IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput. , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 306–319, Apr. 2021. [35]   G. Wang, F. Yang, J. Song, and Z. Han, “Dynamic laser inter-satellite link scheduling based on federated reinforcement learning: An asyn- chronous hierarchical architecture,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 14273–14288, Oct. 2024. [36]   X. Jia, T. Lv, F. He, and H. Huang, “Collaborative data downloading by using inter-satellite links in LEO satellite networks,”   IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1523–1532, Mar. 2017. [37]   Z. Lin, L. Kuang, B. Liu, C. Jiang, and J. Jin, “A low-complexity return-link beam-hopping scheduling for NGSO mega-constellations with dynamic topology and uneven traffic,”   IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 16695–16710, Jun. 2025. [38]   S. Rougerie and J. Israel, “Mobile satellite propagation channels at Ka band for railway and highway environnement,” in   Proc. 13th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag. (EuCAP) , Krakow, Poland, Mar. 2019, pp. 1–5. [39]   M. Tropea and F. De Rango, “A comprehensive review of channel mod- eling for land mobile satellite communications,”   Electronics , vol. 11, no. 5, p. 820, Mar. 2022. [40]   C. Carrizo, M. Knapek, J. Horwath, D. Diaz Gonzalez, and P. Corn- well, “Optical inter-satellite link terminals for next generation satellite constellations,”   Proc. SPIE , vol. 11272, pp. 8–18, Mar. 2020. [41]   D. P. Bertsekas, “On penalty and multiplier methods for constrained minimization,”   SIAM J. Control Optim. , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 216–235, Feb. 1976. [42]   Y. Sun, P. Babu, and D. P. Palomar, “Majorization-minimization algo- rithms in signal processing, communications, and machine learning,”  IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 794–816, Feb. 2017. [43]   J. A. Momoh, M. E. El-Hawary, and R. Adapa, “A review of selected optimal power flow literature to 1993. II. Newton, linear programming and interior point methods,”   IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 105–111, Feb. 1999. [44]   F. Wang, D. Jiang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Seamless handover in LEO based non-terrestrial networks: Service continuity and optimization,”   IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1008–1023, Feb. 2023. [45]   Satellite   Antenna   Radiation   Patterns   for   Non-Geostationary   Orbit Satellite   Antennas   Operating   in   the   Fixed-Satellite   Service   Below 30   GHz ,   document   ITU-R   S.1528,   ITU-R   Recommendation, Jun. 2001.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND LOAD BALANCING IN MULTI-SATELLITE BH   8147  [46]   Reference Radiation Pattern for Earth Station Antennas in the Fixed- Satellite Service for Use in Coordination and Interference Assessment in the Frequency Range From 2 to 31 GHz , document ITU-R S.465-6, 2010. [47]   A.   Ren,   S.   Liu,   R.   Cai,   W.   Wen,   P.   K.   Varshney,   and   Y.   Wang, “Algorithm-hardware co-optimization of the memristor-based frame- work for solving SOCP and homogeneous QCQP problems,” in   Proc. 22nd Asia South Pacific Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC) , Chiba, Japan, Jan. 2017, pp. 788–793. [48]   J. Papandriopoulos, S. Dey, and J. Evans, “Optimal and distributed protocols for cross-layer design of physical and transport layers in MANETs,”   IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1392–1405, Dec. 2008.  Guanhua Wang   (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Bei- jing, China, in 2021, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the DTV Technology Research and Development Center, Department of Electronic Engineering. His research interests are in optical satellite networks and machine learning for commu- nication.  Fang Yang   (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2005 and 2009, respectively. Currently, he is an Asso- ciate Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. He has published more than 180 peer-reviewed journal articles and conference papers. He holds more than 50 Chinese patents and two PCT patents. His research interests are in the fields of visible light communication, optical intelligent reflecting surface, and satellite communications. He is a fellow of IET. He received the IEEE Scott Helt Memorial Award (Best Paper Award in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON   B ROAD -  CASTING ) in 2015.  Jiaji   Liu   (Graduate   Student   Member,   IEEE) received the B.S. degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Bei- jing, China, in 2024, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the DTV Technology Research and Development Center, Department of Electronic Engineering. His research interests are in the field of visible light communications and uncrewed aerial vehicle-assisted communications.  Jian   Song   (Fellow,   IEEE)   received   the   B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1990 and 1995, respectively. He is currently the Director of Tsinghua DTV Technology Research and Devel- opment Center, Tsinghua University. He has been working in quite different areas, including fiberoptic, satellite, wireless communications, and power-line communications. He holds two U.S. and more than 80 Chinese patents. He has published more than 300 peer-reviewed journal articles and conference papers and co-authored several books in the aforementioned areas. His current research interest is in the area of digital TV broadcasting, network conver- gence, and visible light communication networks. He is also Fellow of IET, Chinese Institute of Electronics, and Chinese Institute of Communications. He won several awards both international and domestic.  Zhu Han   (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, in 1997, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1999 and 2003, respec- tively. From 2000 to 2002, he was an Research and Development   Engineer   of   JDSU,   Germantown, Maryland. From 2003 to 2006, he was a Research Associate with the University of Maryland. From 2006 to 2008, he was an Assistant Professor with Boise State University, Idaho. Currently, he is a John and Rebecca Moores Professor with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department and the Computer Science Department, University of Houston, Texas. His main research targets on the novel game-theory related concepts critical to enabling efficient and distributive use of wireless networks with limited resources. His other research interests include wireless resource allocation and management, wireless communications and networking, quantum computing, data science, smart grid, carbon neutralization, and security and privacy. Since 2019, he has been a fellow of AAAS, and since 2024, he has been a fellow of ACM. Since 2017, he has been a 1% Highly Cited Researcher according to Web of Science. He received the NSF Career Award in 2010, the Fred W. Ellersick Prize of the IEEE Communication Society in 2011, the EURASIP Best Paper Award for  Journal on Advances in Signal Processing   in 2015, the IEEE Leonard G. Abra- ham Prize in the field of communications systems (Best Paper Award in IEEE J OURNAL ON   S ELECTED   A REAS IN   C OMMUNICATIONS ) in 2016, the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society 2022 Best Land Transportation Paper Award, and several best paper awards in IEEE conferences. He is also the winner of the 2021 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award (an IEEE Field Award), for outstanding early to mid-career contributions to technologies holding the promise of innovative applications, with the following citation: “for contributions to game theory and distributed management of autonomous communication networks.” He was the IEEE Communications Society Distinguished Lecturer from 2015 to 2018 and the ACM Distinguished Speaker from 2022 to 2025.  Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:24:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.